Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,--
Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it--for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untender'd.
And, to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Julius. Britain is
A world by itself; and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own noses.
That opportunity
Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
The kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats,
But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here; but made not here his brag
Of 'Came' and 'saw' and 'overcame: ' with shame--
That first that ever touch'd him--he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping--
Poor ignorant baubles!-- upon our terrible seas,
Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd
As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
O giglot fortune!--to master Caesar's sword,
Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.
Come, there's no more tribute to be paid:
our kingdom is stronger than it was at that time; and,
as I said, there is no moe such Caesars:
other of them may have crook'd noses, but to owe such
straight arms, none.
Son, let your mother end.
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard
as Cassibelan: I do not say I am one; but I have a hand.
Why tribute? why should we pay tribute?
If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket,
or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free:
Caesar's ambition,
Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o' the world, against all colour here
Did put the yoke upon 's; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be.
I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy:
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee:
look for fury not to be resisted.
Thus defied, I thank thee for myself.
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monster's her accuser? Leonatus,
O master! what a strange infection
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevail'd
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No:
She's punish'd for her truth, and undergoes,
More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master!
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How! that I should murder her?
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
That I should seem to lack humanity
so much as this fact comes to?
'Do't: the letter
that I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper!
Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st
So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
How now, Pisanio!
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
'Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take me
in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me,
as you, O the dearest of creatures,
would even renew me with your eyes.
Take notice that I am in Cambria,
at Milford-Haven: what your own love
will out of this advise you, follow.
So he wishes you all happiness,
that remains loyal to his vow, and your,
increasing in love,
LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.'
O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
He is at Milford-Haven: read, and tell me
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day?
Prithee, speak,
How many score of miles may we well ride
'Twixt hour and hour?
One score 'twixt sun and sun,
Madam, 's enough for you:
and too much too.
Why, one that rode to's execution, man,
Could never go so slow:
But this is foolery:
Go bid my woman feign a sickness;
say she'll home to her father: and provide me presently
A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit
A franklin's housewife.
Madam, you're best consider.
I see before me, man: nor here, nor here,
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them,
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee;
Do as I bid thee: there's no more to say,
Accessible is none but Milford way.
A goodly day not to keep house, with such
Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate
Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you
To a morning's holy office: the gates of monarchs
Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbans on, without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill;
Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats.
Consider, when you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which lessens and sets off;
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war:
Out of your proof you speak: we, poor unfledged,
Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not
What air's from home. Haply this life is best,
If quiet life be best; sweeter to you
That have a sharper known; well corresponding
With your stiff age: but unto us it is
A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed;
A prison for a debtor, that not dares
To stride a limit.
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? when we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
We are beastly.
How you speak!
Did you but know the city's usuries
And felt them knowingly; the art o' the court
As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slippery that
The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' the war,
O boys, this story
The world may read in me: my body's mark'd
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note: Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night,
A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.
Uncertain favour!
My fault being nothing--as I have told you oft--
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail'd
Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline
I was confederate with the Romans: so
Follow'd my banishment, and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world;
But up to the mountains!
This is not hunters' language:
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to the king;
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine;
This Polydore,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The king his father call'd Guiderius,--Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story: say 'Thus, mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on 's neck;' even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure,
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
His own conceiving.--Hark, the game is roused!
O Cymbeline! heaven and my conscience knows
Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon,
At three and two years old, I stole these babes;
Thinking to bar thee of succession,
as Thou reft'st me of my lands.
Euriphile, Thou wast their nurse;
they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honour to her grave:
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd,
They take for natural father.
The game is up.
Where is Posthumus?
What is in thy mind,
That makes thee stare thus?
One, but painted thus,
Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd
Beyond self-explication:
What's the matter. man?
Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with
A look untender?
My husband's hand!
That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him,
And he's at some hard point. Speak, man: thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.
Please you, read;
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
The most disdain'd of fortune.
'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played
the strumpet in my bed; the testimonies whereof
lie bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises,
but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain
as I expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio,
must act for me, if thy faith be not tainted with
the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take away
her life:
I shall give thee opportunity
at Milford-Haven. She hath my letter for the purpose
where, if thou fear to strike and to make me certain
it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour
and equally to me disloyal.'
What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper
Hath cut her throat already.
False to his bed! What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock?
if sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him
And cry myself awake? that's false to's bed, is it?
Alas, good lady!
I false! Thy conscience witness: Iachimo,
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
Thou then look'dst like a villain; now methinks
Thy favour's good enough.
Some jay of Italy
Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him:
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion;
And, for I am richer than to hang by the walls,
I must be ripp'd:--to pieces with me!--O,
Men's vows are women's traitors!
All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villany; not born where't grows,
But worn a bait for ladies.
Good madam, hear me.
Come, fellow, be thou honest:
Do thou thy master's bidding: when thou see'st him,
A little witness my obedience: look!
I draw the sword myself: take it,
and hit the innocent mansion of my love, my heart;
Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief;
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it:
do his bidding; strike!
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause;
But now thou seem'st a coward.
Hence, vile instrument!
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
Why, I must die;
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy master's.
Come, here's my heart.
Something's afore't. Soft, soft! we'll no defence;
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turn'd to heresy? Away, away,
Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers:
though those that are betray'd
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe.
And thou, Posthumus,
Come, strike!
The lamb entreats the butcher: where's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding,
When I desire it too.
O gracious lady,
Since I received command to do this business
I have not slept one wink.
Do't, and to bed then.
I'll wake mine eye-balls blind first.
Wherefore then didst undertake it?
Why hast thou abused
So many miles with a pretence?
But to win time
To lose so bad employment; in the which
I have consider'd of a course. Good lady,
Hear me with patience.
Talk thy tongue weary;
I have heard I am a strumpet; and mine ear
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that.
But speak.
It cannot be
But that my master is abused:
Some villain, ay, and singular in his art.
Hath done you both this cursed injury.
Some Roman courtezan.
No, on my life.
I'll give but notice you are dead and send him
Some bloody sign of it; for 'tis commanded
I should do so: you shall be miss'd at court,
And that will well confirm it.
What shall I do the where? where bide? how live?
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven
To-morrow: now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
That which, to appear itself, must not yet be
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view; yea, haply, near
The residence of Posthumus;
O, for such means! I would adventure.
Well, then, here's the point:
You must forget to be a woman;
change command into obedience: fear and niceness
into a waggish courage:
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.
First, make yourself but like one.
Fore-thinking this, I have already fit--
'Tis in my cloak-bag--doublet, hat, hose, all
That answer to them:
'fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
wherein you're happy,
With joy he will embrace you, for he's honourable
Thou art all the comfort
The gods will diet me with.
This attempt I am soldier to, and will abide it
with a prince's courage. Away, I prithee.
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected
of your carriage from the court.
My noble mistress,
Here is a box; I had it from the queen:
What's in't is precious; if you are sick at sea,
Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper.
To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood.
May the gods direct you to the best!
Amen: I thank thee.
Thanks, royal sir.
My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence;
And am right sorry that I must report ye
My master's enemy.
Our subjects, sir,
Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
Appear unkinglike.
So, sir: I desire of you
A conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.
Madam, all joy befal your grace!
And you!
My lords, you are appointed for that office;
The due of honour in no point omit.
So farewell, noble Lucius.
Your hand, my lord.
Receive it friendly; but from this time forth
I wear it as your enemy.
Sir, the event
Is yet to name the winner: fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness!
He goes hence frowning: but it honours us
That we have given him cause.
'Tis all the better;
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness:
The powers that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.
'Tis not sleepy business;
But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appear'd
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd
The duty of the day: she looks us like
A thing more made of malice than of duty:
We have noted it. Call her before us; for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
Royal sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
'Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
And strokes death to her.
Where is she, sir?
How can her contempt be answer'd?
Please you, sir,
Her chambers are all lock'd; and there's no answer
That will be given to the loudest noise we make.
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you,
Which daily she was bound to proffer:
This she wish'd me to make known; but our great court
Made me to blame in memory.
Her doors lock'd?
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
Prove false!
Son, I say, follow the king.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
have not seen these two days.
Go, look after.
Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus!
He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes
It is a thing most precious.
But for her, where is she gone?
Haply, despair hath seized her,
Or, wing'd with fervor of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is
To death or to dishonour; and my end
Can make good use of either:
She being down, I have the placing of the British crown.
How now, my son!
'Tis certain she is fled.
Go in and cheer the king: he rages;
none dare come about him.
All the better: may this night forestall him
of the coming day!
I love and hate her: for she's fair and royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman; from every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
Outsells them all; I love her therefore:
but disdaining me and throwing favours on
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
That what's else rare is choked; and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For when fools Shall--
Who is here?
What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither:
ah, you precious pander!
Villain, Where is thy lady? In a word; or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends.
O, good my lord!
Where is thy lady? Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.
O, my all-worthy lord!
All-worthy villain!
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
At the next word: no more of 'worthy lord!'
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death.
Then, sir,
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.
Let's see't. I will pursue her
Even to Augustus' throne.
I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
Sirrah, is this letter true?
Sir, as I think.
It is Posthumus' hand; I know't.
Sirrah, if thou wouldst not be a villain,
but do me true service,
undergo those employments wherein I should have
cause to use thee with a serious industry,
that is, what villany soe'er I bid thee do, to perform it
directly and truly, I would think thee an honest man:
thou shouldst neither want my means
for thy relief nor my voice for thy preferment.
Well, my good lord.
Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently
and constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune
of that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not,
in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower
of mine: wilt thou serve me?
Sir, I will.
Give me thy hand; here's my purse.
Hast any of thy late master's garments in thy possession?
I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit
he wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither:
let it be thy lint service; go.
I shall, my lord.
Meet thee at Milford-Haven!--
I forgot to ask him one thing;
I'll remember't anon:--
even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I kill thee.
I would these garments were come.
She said upon a time--the bitterness of it
I now belch from my heart--that she
held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect
than my noble and natural person together
with the adornment of my qualities.
With that suit upon my back,
will I ravish her:
Be those the garments?
Ay, my noble lord.
How long is't since she went to Milford-Haven?
She can scarce be there yet.
Bring this apparel to my chamber;
that is the second thing that I have commanded thee:
the third is,
that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design.
Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
How fit his garments serve me.
Why should his mistress
who was made by him  that made the tailor
not be fit too?
I dare speak it to myself
where it is not vain glory
for a man and his glass to confer
in his own chambers.
The lines of my body are as well-drawn as his,
no less young, more strong,
not beneath him in fortunes,
beyond him in the advantage of the time
above him in birth
alike conversant in general services
and more remarkable in single oppositions.
Yet this imperceiverant thing loves him in my despite.
What mortality is!
Stay; come not in.
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy.
What's the matter, sir?
By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
An earthly paragon!
Good masters, harm me not:
I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strew'd i' the floor. Here's money for my meat:
I would have left it on the board so soon
As I had made my meal, and parted
With prayers for the provider.
Money, youth?
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt!
As 'tis no better reckon'd, but of those
Who worship dirty gods.
I see you're angry:
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it.
Whither bound?
To Milford-Haven.
What's your name?
Fidele, sir.
I have a kinsman who Is bound for Italy;
he embark'd at Milford;
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fall'n in this offence.
Prithee, fair youth,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encounter'd!
'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart: and thanks to stay and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.
I'll love him as my brother:
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
After long absence, such is yours: most welcome!
The night to the owl and morn to the lark
less welcome.